[mrtcore] Microsoft.Windows.Globalization.ApplicationLanguages API specs (#4479)
microsoft/WindowsAppSDK: specs/mrtcore/PrimaryLanguageOverride/PrimaryLanguageOverride.md

# ApplicationLanguages.PrimaryLanguageOverride

This feature provides the ability to change the application language for WindowsAppSDK applications,
comparable to the one in
[Windows.Globalization.ApplicationLanguages.PrimaryLanguageOverride](https://learn.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.globalization.applicationlanguages).
The benefit of this addition is that it applies to both packaged and un-packaged WindowsAppSDK
applications, whereas the existing one is not supported for un-packaged.

# Background

Changing the application language using
[PrimaryLanguageOverride](https://learn.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.globalization.applicationlanguages.primarylanguageoverride)
property from `Windows.Globalization.ApplicationLanguages` namespace is not supported for
WindowsAppSDK un-packaged apps, only for packaged. To support the same behavior for un-packaged
applications `PrimaryLanguageOverride` property is introduced in
`Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.Resources` MRTCore namespace. This property
(`Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.Resources.PrimaryLanguageOverride`) overrides the behavior of

> the existing one (`Windows.Globalization.ApplicationLanguages.PrimaryLanguageOverride`).

Reviewer: "FooOverride overrides the behavior of BarOverride" is too many instances of the word 'override'! 

Maybe:
> This property
(`Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.Resources.PrimaryLanguageOverride`) **takes precedence over**
the existing one (`Windows.Globalization.ApplicationLanguages.PrimaryLanguageOverride`).

Author: sounds good. Updated

Specifies the language-related preferences that the app can use and maintain.

# Remarks

The languages referenced in this class are represented by
[BCP-47](https://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp47) language tags. Each of these is a language identifier
and not a locale name, although the two structurally can be the same. As a language tag, "en-US"
means American English (or the dialect of English spoken in the United States). It makes no claims
about the actual location of the speakers (though many of them do reside in the US) and no other
claims about conventions that are used in the US such as the measurement system or currency.

Example:

```c#
Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.Resources.ApplicationLanguages.PrimaryLanguageOverride = "en-US";
```

Language tags support the Unicode extensions "ca-" and "nu-". (See Unicode Key/Type Definitions.)
Note that these extensions can affect the numeral system or calendar used by globalization objects.

## ApplicationLanguages.PrimaryLanguageOverride property

Gets or sets an override for the app's preferred language, expressed as a
[BCP-47 language tag](https://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp47). This setting is global for the running

> process and is not persisted.

Reviewer: I would call out explicitly here that this is a difference in behavior from the `Windows.Globalization` api.

Author: done.Thank you

Author: fixed

afterwards, both resources loaded from the code and the resources loaded by XAML. However, this
change may not take effect immediately on resources already loaded in the app UI. To make sure the
app responds to such changes, actions may be needed to reload resources. Those requirements may vary
depending on the UI framework used by the app, and it may be necessary to restart the app.

This property overrides the behavior of
[PrimaryLanguageOverride](https://learn.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.globalization.applicationlanguages.primarylanguageoverride)
property from Windows.Globalization.ApplicationLanguages namespace property.

Example:

```c#
public partial class App : Application
{
    // ...
    public App()
    {
        // Set the primary language override to German (Germany)
        // This will cause the app to use the German (Germany) resources
        // Both resources loaded manually with ResourceLoader and XAML resources fetched with x:Uid
        // will be German (Germany)
        Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.Resources.ApplicationLanguages.PrimaryLanguageOverride = "de-DE";

>         this.InitializeComponent();

Reviewer: This sample is improved over what was there before. I think it would be even better if it closed the loop and included a line of code that retrieves a localized resource programmatically, to show PrimaryLanguageOverride having an effect.

Author: updated

this setting is global for the running process and is not persisted.

```c#
public static string PrimaryLanguageOverride { get; set; }
```

# Property Value

[String](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.string)

A [BCP-47 language tag](https://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp47). The app can set it to override the
language. It must be a single language tag; a delimited list of language tags will result in default
language being used.

The PrimaryLanguageOverride property should only be set to languages available for the app.

When your app gets the value, PrimaryLanguageOverride returns either a single language tag (if your
app has previously set the property) or an empty string.

# Remarks

Apps normally run with language settings determined by the system by comparing the languages
supported by the app with the language preferences of the user. The PrimaryLanguageOverride property
is used to override that behavior by setting a single specific language.

The PrimaryLanguageOverride setting is not persisted between sessions. It should be set each time
the app is loaded. You should set PrimaryLanguageOverride setting in early stage of app loading,

> before any resource is loaded. It should only be set based on user input presented in settings UI.

Reviewer 2: is it possible to set early enough so that WinUI will be able to respect it?

Author: Setting it before InitializeComponent in App() constructor like presented here https://github.com/microsoft/WindowsAppSDK-Samples/pull/358/files#diff-af77dcd97ddae80357680b47edbe8940ebd597b31bf81dd152af69067e46f701R40
worked for me in every scenario I tested

# ApplicationLanguages

This new type (`Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.Resources.ApplicationLanguages`) is a wrapper for
the OS `Windows.Globalization.ApplicationLanguages` type with the updated behavior for the

> `PrimaryLanguageOverride` property to be supported for un-packaged apps.

Reviewer 3: Where WinAppSDK has a replacement for a Platform SDK API, we should match the namespace other than prefixing with `Microsoft.`. Moving this from Globalization to Resources sounds like an org alignment

Reviewer: RECOMMEND: Update to Microsoft.Windows.Globalization.ApplicationLanguages.

# Background

Changing the application language using
[PrimaryLanguageOverride](https://learn.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.globalization.applicationlanguages.primarylanguageoverride)
property from `Windows.Globalization.ApplicationLanguages` namespace is not supported for

> WindowsAppSDK un-packaged apps, only for packaged. To support language change for un-packaged

Reviewer 3: Nit, the docs don't hyphenate

```suggestion
WindowsAppSDK un-packaged apps, only for packaged. To support language change for unpackaged
```

Reviewer: Fix.

applications `ApplicationLanguages` type is introduced in
`Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.Resources` MRTCore namespace.
`Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.Resources.ApplicationLanguages.PrimaryLanguageOverride` property
is supported both for packaged and un-packaged WindowsAppSDK apps.

This new type (`Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.Resources.ApplicationLanguages`) is a wrapper for
the OS type with the updated behavior for the `PrimaryLanguageOverride` to support un-packaged apps.
`Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.Resources.ApplicationLanguages` should serve as a replacement
for the existing OS type (`Windows.Globalization.ApplicationLanguages.PrimaryLanguageOverride`).

> `GetLanguagesForUser(User)` method from `Windows.Globalization.ApplicationLanguages` is being

Reviewer 4: The (User) part is confusing to me. Is this supposed to be (ForUser) like there are two methods one with ForUser at the end?

```suggestion
`GetLanguages(ForUser)` method from `Windows.Globalization.ApplicationLanguages` is being
```

Author: It's the argument of the method. The method name is GetLanguagesForUser and it takes one argument. User is the type of the argument

Reviewer 3: I'm still a bit confused on when we want to use the singleton pattern vs the static pattern.
@jonwis FYI

Reviewer: RECOMENDED: Leave as is. This new type does not have the ...ForUser variant anyway.

intentionally left off due to not being relevant for WinAppSDK.

> # API Pages

Reviewer 3: This is all copy/paste from existing docs? Or are there differences in here beyond a couple of mentions of unpackaged?

Reviewer: Correct. Other than the comments around packed vs unpackaged or UWP vs Win32.

A computed list of languages that merges the app's declared supported languages
(ApplicationLanguages.ManifestLanguages) with the user's ranked list of preferred languages.

Note: This property returns the same values as the language list exposed by
[Windows.Globalization.ApplicationLanguages.Languages](https://learn.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.globalization.applicationlanguages.languages)
property.

# Remarks

At runtime, the list of languages for which your app has declared support (the app manifest language
list) is compared with the list of languages for which the user has declared a preference (the user
profile language list). The app runtime language list is set to this intersection (if the
intersection is not empty), or to just the app's default language (if the intersection is empty).
For more detail, see the
[App runtime language list](https://learn.microsoft.com/windows/apps/design/globalizing/manage-language-and-region#app-runtime-language-list)
section in
[Understand user profile languages and app manifest languages](https://learn.microsoft.com/windows/apps/design/globalizing/manage-language-and-region).

## ApplicationLanguages.ManifestLanguages property

> Gets the app's declared list of supported languages.

Reviewer 3: What if you have no manifest (unpackaged app)?

Reviewer: RECOMMEND: 
1. Make this return an empty list instead of throwing an exception.
2. Update the doc here to state that it returns an empty list.

by the ManifestLanguages property is limited to the languages currently available on the system for
the user. Languages included in the main app package manifest will always be returned; languages
from resource packages will be returned only if the language is applicable for the user (that is, is
in the user's preferences) and the resource package has been installed and registered for the user
at the time the property is accessed.

## ApplicationLanguages.PrimaryLanguageOverride property

Gets or sets an override for the app's preferred language, expressed as a
[BCP-47 language tag](https://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp47). For packaged apps, this property is a
wrapper for
[Windows.Globalization.ApplicationLanguages.PrimaryLanguageOverride](https://learn.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.globalization.applicationlanguages.primarylanguageoverride)
property and behaves the same. This setting is global for the running process. Unlike for packaged
apps, for un-packaged apps, this setting is not persisted between app sessions.

```c#
public static string PrimaryLanguageOverride { get; set; }
```

# Property Value

[String](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.string)

> A [BCP-47 language tag](https://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp47). The app can set it to override the

Reviewer 5: If I set a string that can't be a well-formed language tag, does that throw a usage error or is it ignored?

Author: setting a string that is not  a language tag would throw an exception saying "The parameter is incorrect."

Reviewer: RECOMMEND: Update the doc to state that this api throws an exception if given an invalid string.

> language. It must be a single language tag; a delimited list of language tags will result in default

Reviewer 5: Does "default language" mean "it takes the first language in your list", "the property keeps the value it had before you tried to set it to a list", or "the property gets reset to empty by this attempt"?

Author: Actually, this is wrong. Setting delimited list of language tags will result in "The parameter is incorrect." as well. This is copy-pasted from W.G. property docs, so the docs are wrong there. This line needs to be fixed.

Reviewer: RECOMMEND: Update this doc to state that it throws exception. 

CONSIDER: Update existing public doc.

language being used.

> The PrimaryLanguageOverride property should only be set to languages available for the app.

Reviewer 5: "should be", what happens when a developer sets an override that isn't one of the supported languages?  Is the "set" ignored, and getting the property again still returns the previous value?

Reviewer 6: Or is it an error when setting to an unsupported language?

Author: We align with how Windows.Globalization property behaves:
 - setting an unsupported language is ignored - results in the default language being used. No errors/exceptions.
 - setting a non-language tag would throw an exception saying "The parameter is incorrect."

Author: > Is the "set" ignored, and getting the property again still returns the previous value?

Yes. This is correct.

Reviewer: RECOMENDED: 

Update docs to be clearer about what "unsupported" language is. 
Update docs to say what happens when an invalid value is set.

When your app gets the value, PrimaryLanguageOverride returns either a single language tag (if your
app has previously set the property) or an empty string.

# Remarks

Apps normally run with language settings determined by the system by comparing the languages
supported by the app with the language preferences of the user. The PrimaryLanguageOverride property
is used to override that behavior by setting a single specific language.

For packaged apps, `PrimaryLanguageOverride` setting is a wrapper for
[Windows.Globalization.ApplicationLanguages.PrimaryLanguageOverride](https://learn.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.globalization.applicationlanguages.primarylanguageoverride)

> property and behaves the same. It is persisted between app sessions.

Reviewer 6: What is an 'app session'?

Author: Single run of an application - i.e. session starts when app is ran, and ends when application is closed. This is copy-pasted from W.G. property docs. It is used there without additional explanation

Reviewer: RECOMMEND: Leave as-is.

> For un-packaged apps, `PrimaryLanguageOverride` setting is not persisted between sessions. It should

Reviewer 6: NIT: unpackaged (no hyphen)

Reviewer: Fix.

be set each time the app is loaded. You should set PrimaryLanguageOverride setting in early stage of
app loading, before any resource is loaded.

> The property should only be set based on user input presented in settings UI. It can be read at any

Reviewer 6: 'should'. And what if it isn't?

Author: This line should be moved to "packaged apps" part, after "It is persisted between app sessions" part. It means that it should not be set on every app launch, but only on user input from app settings.

Reviewer: Move to "packaged apps" section.

time. If the property has never been set, it returns an empty string.

When you set the PrimaryLanguageOverride, this will be immediately reflected in resources loaded
afterwards, both resources loaded from the code and the resources loaded by XAML. However, this
change may not take effect immediately on resources already loaded in the app UI. To make sure the
app responds to such changes, actions may be needed to reload resources. Those requirements may vary
depending on the UI framework used by the app, and it may be necessary to restart the app.

Example:

```c#
public partial class App : Application
{
    // ...
    public App()
    {
        // Set the primary language override to German (Germany)
        // This will cause the app to use the German (Germany) resources
        // Both resources loaded manually with ResourceLoader and XAML resources fetched with x:Uid
        // will be German (Germany)
        Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.Resources.ApplicationLanguages.PrimaryLanguageOverride = "de-DE";

>         Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.Resources.ResourceLoader resourceLoader = new Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.Resources.ResourceLoader();

Reviewer 6: NIT: `var resourceLoader = ...`

No need to repeat the type given it's the ctor on the right side of the `=`

Reviewer: Fix.

        var resourceString = resourceLoader.GetString("SampleString");

        this.InitializeComponent();
    }
    // ...
}
```

# API Details

```c# (but really MIDL3)
namespace Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.Resources
{
  // ...
  [contract(MrtCoreContract, 2)]

>   runtimeclass ApplicationLanguages

Reviewer 6: Do we routinely use plural names in WinRT? Should be this `ApplicationLanguage`?

Author: the idea was to mimic existing Windows.Globalization namespace type https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/windows.globalization.applicationlanguages?view=winrt-22621

Reviewer: Keep as-is since it is a copy of the OS api.

  {

>       static IVectorView<String> Languages { get; };

Reviewer 6: Why not `IVector<String>`?

Author: To align with Windows.globalization property used in the background . and get IReadOnlyList in C#

Reviewer: Keep as is to match existing api.

>       static IVectorView<String> ManifestLanguages { get; };

Reviewer 6: `IVector<String>`?

Author: To align with Windows.globalization property used in the background . and get IReadOnlyList in C#

Reviewer: Keep as-is to match existing api.

> # ApplicationLanguages.PrimaryLanguageOverride

Reviewer: Also update the blurb below now that we are lifting the full class. Keep the detail that the motivation is to update the behavior of PrimaryLanguageOverride.

> # ApplicationLanguages.PrimaryLanguageOverride

Reviewer: We can also explicitly state that this new type is primarily a wrapper for the OS type, just with the updated behavior for PrimaryLanguageOverride.

at the time the property is accessed.

## ApplicationLanguages.PrimaryLanguageOverride property

Gets or sets an override for the app's preferred language, expressed as a
[BCP-47 language tag](https://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp47). This setting is global for the running
process. Unlike
[Windows.Globalization.ApplicationLanguages.PrimaryLanguageOverride](https://learn.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.globalization.applicationlanguages.primarylanguageoverride),
this setting is not persisted between app sessions.

```c#
public static string PrimaryLanguageOverride { get; set; }
```

# Property Value

[String](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.string)

A [BCP-47 language tag](https://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp47). The app can set it to override the
language. It must be a single language tag; a delimited list of language tags will result in default
language being used.

The PrimaryLanguageOverride property should only be set to languages available for the app.

When your app gets the value, PrimaryLanguageOverride returns either a single language tag (if your
app has previously set the property) or an empty string.

# Remarks

> Apps normally run with language settings determined by the system by comparing the languages

Reviewer: Is the new design that setting this property will also set the underlying OS property? If so, state as much. Also, if this is the case, then the property will be persisted for packaged apps. So we should state that also.

depending on the UI framework used by the app, and it may be necessary to restart the app.

This property (Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.Resources.PrimaryLanguageOverride) takes
precedence over the existing one
[Windows.Globalization.ApplicationLanguages.PrimaryLanguageOverride](https://learn.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.globalization.applicationlanguages.primarylanguageoverride).

Example:

```c#
public partial class App : Application
{
    // ...
    public App()
    {
        // Set the primary language override to German (Germany)
        // This will cause the app to use the German (Germany) resources
        // Both resources loaded manually with ResourceLoader and XAML resources fetched with x:Uid
        // will be German (Germany)
        Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.Resources.ApplicationLanguages.PrimaryLanguageOverride = "de-DE";

        Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.Resources.ResourceLoader resourceLoader = new Microsoft.Windows.ApplicationModel.Resources.ResourceLoader();
        var resourceString = resourceLoader.GetString("SampleString");

        this.InitializeComponent();
    }
    // ...
}
```

> ## ApplicationLanguages.GetLanguagesForUser(User) Method

Reviewer: I think MUA is not applicable to WinAppSDK apps, so I think we can actually remove this from this type.

Remove the api here and then update the Background to state that it is being intentionally left off due to not being relevant for WinAppSDK.
